RFC: Catalog data cleaning (#345)
WordPress/openverse: rfcs/20221209-data-cleaning.md

# RFC: Cleaning up the upstream database

> One of the steps of the [data refresh process for images][data-refresh] is cleaning data that is not fit for production. This process runs weekly as Airflow DAGs, the cleaned data is only saved to the API database (DB), which is replaced when the data refresh finishes, so it needs to be cleaned every time. This cleaning step takes up to 16 hours lately. It has been stable in duration given the strategy changed to perform the validations and transformations of the data upfront, when pulling from providers rather than when copying the upstream catalog DB into the API DB, but images ingested prior to this change remained untouched.

Reviewer: Nit, just for clarity
```suggestion
One of the steps of the [data refresh process for images][data-refresh] is cleaning data that is not fit for production. This process runs weekly as Airflow DAGs, the cleaned data is only saved to the API database (DB), which is replaced when the data refresh finishes, so it needs to be cleaned every time. At the time of this draft, this cleaning step takes up to 16 hours. It has been stable in duration given the strategy changed to perform the validations and transformations of the data upfront, when pulling from providers rather than when copying the upstream catalog DB into the API DB, but images ingested prior to this change remained untouched.
```

> One of the steps of the [data refresh process for images][data-refresh] is cleaning data that is not fit for production. This process runs weekly as Airflow DAGs, the cleaned data is only saved to the API database (DB), which is replaced when the data refresh finishes, so it needs to be cleaned every time. This cleaning step takes up to 16 hours lately. It has been stable in duration given the strategy changed to perform the validations and transformations of the data upfront, when pulling from providers rather than when copying the upstream catalog DB into the API DB, but images ingested prior to this change remained untouched.

Reviewer 2: > images ingested prior to this change remained untouched.

Is this something we can account for efficiently in the cleanup DAG, to reduce the number of images that need to be cleaned?

Because many of our DAGs are not dated, and therefore re-ingest all data on each run (using the MediaStore even if they did not when originally ingested), does this mean that all records for those providers should be okay? Likewise, for our dated DAGs do we only need to be concerned about records that have not recently been reingested?

The only other exception I can think of is records which were ingested before the introduction of the MediaStores, then deleted from the provider (which is not caught by our DAGs). I also know that we have some records not associated to provider DAGs, which will definitely need to be cleaned.

Reviewer 3: Can you confirm that the URLs are replaced with the validated URLs, and the tags are _replaced_ and not simply added to during the re-ingestion, @stacimc? Tags use a JSON Array Column that uses the following strategy when upserting:

https://github.com/WordPress/openverse-catalog/blob/5933f712d2d017eb1d952c68fffc6f1606d58eb1/openverse_catalog/dags/common/storage/columns.py#L57-L65

I can't really understand what exactly is happening here :)

Reviewer 2: URLs (and most other data) are overwritten during ingestion, but you're right @obulat that tags are only added to. Confirmed locally:

* Ingest a record A with tag names "foo" and "bar"
* The external provider updates the record to delete/update tags, so it now has only tag name "FOO"
* Re-ingest record A
* The record in the Catalog will now contain tag names "foo", "bar", and "FOO"

I do think that feels like an additional issue -- maybe one that should be handled here? @krysal what do you think? For non-dated DAGs, if we end up changing that upsert strategy we'd either need to (a) do something like the data cleanup DAG again, or (b) commit to letting the reingestion workflows slowly update them.

That being said, as far as the steps in the data cleanup go I _think_ the point stands -- for non-dated DAGs, they should be updated during regular ingestion _once the additional steps are added to the MediaStore_. Does that make sense or do you see other edge cases?

Still the only exception I see is dead records that have been deleted from the original provider but are still in our catalog. It would be nice to get a better picture of how many of those we have.

As seen, this is a costly process in terms of time and CPU resources, and it is inefficient to repeat it every time. Here I want to propose solving it in origin by doing a one-time pass by the image table of the upstream DB. We can follow the approach proposed by a previous Data Engineer contributor to [clean preexisting data using ImageStore][imagestore], see the details explained in the pull request and linked issue. The advantage of this way is that we apply not only the [cleaning steps defined in the ingestion server][cleanin-steps-is] but all the extra validations which were added later. I can foresee us using the same workflow in future opportunities if we require applying new modifications to the existing data, as long as its feasibility is confirmed.

## Plan

After evaluating what needs to be done to get this rid of the duplicated cleaning step, I collected the relevant issues of the openverse-catalog into a new milestone, [Data cleaning unification][milestone], and determined a rough plan to solve them:

>     1. Include the ingestion server cleaning steps in the ImageStore class

Reviewer: Does that mean they are also happening in the `AudioStore` class or do we need to pull that logic into the `MediaStore` base class?

>     1. Include the ingestion server cleaning steps in the ImageStore class

Author: From what I can see at the [`_enrich_tags`][enrich_tags_code] method (called from `clean_media_metadata`), it's only adding the provider from wich the tag is added. We still need to clean duplicates and complete the deny/exclude list.

So the placement of the URL validation is interesting. I thought it would fit better into the `ImageStore` class as we're concentrating there the validation. Do you think it should be moved early to the class or its current place is fine? 

[enrich_tags_code]: https://github.com/WordPress/openverse-catalog/blob/5933f712d2d017eb1d952c68fffc6f1606d58eb1/openverse_catalog/dags/common/storage/media.py#L250-L268

>     1. Include the ingestion server cleaning steps in the ImageStore class

Reviewer 2: > Does that mean they are also happening in the AudioStore class

As I understand it, the steps Olga mentions are already happening for both Audio and Image. `clean_media_metadata` is defined on the `MediaStore` and called by both subclasses, and both classes use the `UrlColumn` for their url fields (and thus get the url validation). Agreed that the duplication and denylist/accuracy threshold checks would need to be added, though. 

> So the placement of the URL validation is interesting. I thought it would fit better into the ImageStore class as we're concentrating there the validation.

I don't mind the url validation where it is, but you could certainly make a case that it should be moved -- but I would say to `clean_media_metadata` in the `MediaStore`, to make sure it continues to be used by Audio as well. In the past I've definitely taken a bit longer to find where that validation is happening, since it's happening in a different place!

>     1. Include the ingestion server cleaning steps in the ImageStore class

Reviewer 3: > Does that mean they are also happening in the AudioStore class or do we need to pull that logic into the MediaStore base class?

Sorry for being unclear: the meta_data clean up steps were extracted to the MediaStore when we added Audio. All of the Audio data fields also go through the clean up step in the Columns' `prepare_string` methods. So, in short, audio does not need to be cleaned. Except for one piece I'll mention below: the duplicate tags.

`_enrich_tags` method _does_ remove the tags that are on denylist: 
https://github.com/WordPress/openverse-catalog/blob/5933f712d2d017eb1d952c68fffc6f1606d58eb1/openverse_catalog/dags/common/storage/media.py#L267

But it doesn't remove the **duplicate tags**! So, all of the tags need to be de-duplicated. And we actually need to add tag de-duplication to the `_enrich_tags` method in `MediaStore`.

For the placement of URL validation: I like the clean separation of concerns where the column is responsible for validating and creating SQL insert/update strings. Would adding documentation to the `MediaStore` class about where the validation for various columns is happening help in discoverability? I think moving the validation to `ImageStore` would mean a lot more code duplication because we would be calling `validate` methods in both ImageStore and AudioStore, for all of the URL fields that we have.

I can see that it's unclear that a method called [`_create_tsv_row`](https://github.com/WordPress/openverse-catalog/blob/5933f712d2d017eb1d952c68fffc6f1606d58eb1/openverse_catalog/dags/common/storage/media.py#L185) actually also performs column validation. I wonder if renaming it and adding a clearer docstrings would help?

        - correct tags
        - correct URI protocol
    2. Create and run an image_cleaner workflow as described above

>     3. Remove the cleanup step for images from the ingestion process

Reviewer 4: Thanks for pulling the issues into the milestone and for writing the steps to the plan. Can you confirm whether the milestone's issues are ordered according to this plan? It's not clear to me from the issue titles which of them correspond to the relevant parts of the plan. Some of them seem easy enough to draw to a specific step of this plan, others less so,

Would it make sense to link the issues to the step described here to make that clearer? Additionally, do the issues in the milestone need to be re-written or re-phrased to match the intention of this RFC? Forgive me if I'm missing context that pulls them together, I may just be misunderstanding the language used in the issues. This one for example: https://github.com/WordPress/openverse-catalog/issues/510. Does "when loading ingested data" mean adding it to the ingestion server project as part of the data refresh? Or would it be changed to reference adding it to the ImageStore cleaning routine? If they need re-writing I guess that would happen after the RFC is approved?

Again, sorry if I'm misunderstanding something here and please let me know if I am.

Author: The issues have not been rewritten to reflect the intended changes. In the case of that issue you mentioned, it seems that was the goal at the moment of creation but adding more steps to the ingestion server is precisely what we would want to avoid here. So yes, I can re-phrase them for sure, if the plan makes sense for the team.

Also, I'm noticing it needs one especially for recovering the `image_cleaner` DAG, a central piece! Aside from that, I don't think it requires a strict order aside from the one described here in the RFC. Issues related to validations need to get resolved before running the cleaner DAG, and removing the cleanup steps from the ingestion server should be the last one.
